.. _glab:

####
Glab
####

.. currentmodule:: glimpse.glab

The :mod:`glab <glimpse.glab>` module provides a simplified interface for
running Glimpse experiments on HMAX-like models. Using this interface, it is
possible to:

* choose the hierarchical model and set its parameters,
* specify a corpus of images,
* learn S2 prototypes,
* extract feature vectors using the chosen model, and
* apply an SVM classifier to the resulting features.

We will cover each of these points in turn, describing the usage of the
relevant glab functions.

Note that the examples below assume that all functions of the glab have been
imported. This can be done using::

   >>> from glimpse.glab import *

Configure the Model
-------------------

The model is chosen by specifying its type to the :func:`SetModelClass`
function.

   >>> from glimpse.models.ml import Model
   >>> SetModelClass(Model)

Once the model is chosen, the collection of parameters can be accessed using
:func:`GetParams`.

   >>> p = GetParams()
   >>> p.num_scales = 8

If desired, the worker pool can also be specified using :func:`SetPool`.

   >>> from glimpse.pools import MulticorePool
   >>> SetPool(MulticorePool)

Specify the Corpus
------------------

To choose the set of images, call the :func:`SetCorpus` function with the
path to the corpus directory.

   >>> SetCorpus("animals")

The :func:`SetCorpus` function randomly selects half of the examples of each
class to train the classifier, and reserves the other half for testing.
Here, "animals" is the path to our corpus, which has the following
structure. ::

   animals/
      cats/
         persian.jpg
         siamese.jpg
         tabby.jpg
         burmese.jpg
      dogs/
         labrador.jpg
         poodle.jpg
         greyhound.jpg
         bulldog.jpg

Thus, our example corpus has two classes ("cats" and "dogs"), with four
examples each.

At times, it may be undesirable to have the images for all classes under the
same parent directory. In this case, we can specify the sub-directory for
each class using the :func:`SetCorpusSubdirs` function.

   >>> SetCorpusSubdirs(["animals/cats", "animals/dogs"])

Finally, it is possible to explicitly specify the training and testing
splits, using the :func:`SetTrainTestSplitFromDirs` function.

   >>> SetTrainTestSplitFromDirs("train-animals", "test-animals")

In this example, both directories would have the same structure as the
"animals" corpus above, with one sub-directory for each object class.

Learn the Prototypes
--------------------

The filters used at the S2 layer are defined by their kernel matrices, or
*prototypes*. These matrices can be :ref:`learned <filter learning>` in a
number of ways. A simple learning mechanism used by Serre et al [1]_ is to
*imprint* these prototypes from the training examples. In glab, this can be
achieved using :func:`ImprintS2Prototypes`.

   >>> ImprintS2Prototypes(10)

In this example, we have asked for 10 prototypes to be chosen from the
training data.

A simple "null hypothesis" for testing the utility of prototype learning is
the use of randomly generated values. Random prototypes can be generated by
calling :func:`MakeUniformRandomS2Prototypes`, which generates a prototype
by choosing each component independently from the uniform distribution.

   >>> MakeUniformRandomS2Prototypes(10)

As in imprinting, the integer argument specifies the number of desired
prototypes. Alternatively, components can be chosen from the normal
distribution using :func:`MakeNormalRandomS2Prototypes`, where the
parameters of the distribution are chosen to fit examples drawn from the
training images. Similarly, the distribution on prototype components can be
modeled non-parametrically using :func:`MakeHistogramRandomS2Prototypes`.
Finally, we can use :func:`MakeShuffledRandomS2Prototypes` to first imprint
a set of prototypes, and then reorder the components of each prototype.

For debugging, note that the set of prototypes can be visualized as a set of
2D matrices (one matrix for each S1 orientation).

   >>> MakeUniformRandomS2Prototypes(10)
   >>> exp = GetExperiment()
   >>> proto = exp.s2_prototypes[0]
   >>> from glimpse.util.gplot import Show3dArray
   >>> Show3dArray(proto)

This example uses :func:`GetExperiment` to access the experimental data
using an object-oriented interface. The list of prototypes arrays is then
accessible via the :attr:`s2_prototypes <Experiment.s2_prototypes>`
attribute. This first prototype is then displayed as a set of matrices using
the :func:`Show3dArray <glimpse.util.gplot.Show3dArray>` function.

.. note::

   Using :func:`Show3dArray <glimpse.util.gplot.Show3dArray>` requires the
   matplotlib package.

Extract Features
----------------

In general, it is unnecessary to explicitly request that features are
extracted, as this is automatically performed when the SVM classifier is
trained.

However, it may be useful to change the type of the extracted features using
the :func:`SetLayer` function.

   >>> SetLayer("C1")

In this example, the feature vectors will be drawn from the model's C1
layer. By default, features will be constructed from the activity of the
model's top-most layer.

Apply the Classifier
--------------------

To train an SVM classifier on the extracted features and then apply this
classifier to the test data, use the :func:`RunSvm` function.

   >>> train_acc, test_acc = RunSvm()

As a result, this function will return classifier accuracy on the training
and testing sets.

Finally, all experimental data generated by the script (including SVM
performance) can be saved to a file using :func:`StoreExperiment`.

   >>> StoreExperiment("/tmp/experiment.dat")

This data can be read back at a later time using :func:`LoadExperiment`.

   >>> LoadExperiment("/tmp/experiment.dat")

References
----------

.. [1] ﻿Serre, T., Oliva, A. & Poggio, T., 2007. A feedforward architecture
       accounts for rapid categorization. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences, 104(15), p.6424-6429.
